---
title: M1 - Computer Networks & the Internet
---

# Computer Networks & the Internet

## A. Design

### Describe the internet and some of its physical components.

The internet is essentially a global computer network. Devices connected to the internet are called *end systems*.

Examples of physical components: routers, servers.

### Describe the advantages and disadvantages of statistical multiplexing to share resources.

Statistical multiplexing: sharing resources based on demand. Bandwidth is allocated based on need. E.g. if a user needs 1Mbps of bandwidth 10% of the time, the other 90% can be used for other users.

Pros: cost-effective resource sharing.

Cons: requires that peak usage >> average usage. If each user needs to transmit all the time, then statistical multiplexing would fail over TDM/FDM.

TDM (time-divison multiplexing) and FDM (frequency division multiplexing) reserves one band for one user.

TDM: Signals appear only for a short fraction of time in an alternating fashion.

FDM: The band is divided into different frequencies each carrying different signals.

### Understand packet switching and best effort.

End systems exchange messages with each other. These messages are divided into small chunks of information called **packets**.

Packets contain a *header* that carries information for where it needs to go and a *payload* that carries the actual data.

Two main types of packet switches: routers and link-layer switches.

A packet switch contains links, each with an output buffer; a queue for arriving packets to wait while the link is busy with the transmission of another packet. This leads to queueing delays.

If the buffer is completely full either the arriving packet or some packet in the buffer will be dropped - resulting in **packet loss**.

### Understand circuit switching and how it differs from packet switching.

Circuit switching reserves the resources needed along a path for communication between two end systems.

The network establishes a dedicated end-to-end communication between two hosts. Removes the possibility of having to "wait" like in packet switching.

### Know the advantages and disadvantages of packet versus circuit switching.

Packet switching:

* Not suitable for real-time services like telephone and video conference calls because of unpredictable end-to-end delays.
* Offers better sharing of transmission capacity.
* More efficient and less costly to implement than circuit switching.

Example:

> Users share a 1Mbps link, alternates between periods of activity and inactivity. When active, requires 100kbps of data. Chance of being active = 10%.

With circuit switching, 100kbps must be reserved at all times. Thus the link can only support 10 users.

Packet switching would only offer increased latency if there are more than 10 simultaneous active users. The chance that there are more than 10 simultaneous active users is very low (0.0004). Therefore 99.96% of the time packet switching would offer the same performance as circuit switching, while supporting more users at the same time.

## B. Protocols and Encapsulation

### Define the term protocol in the context of a computer network.


### Know in a general way, where the functionality and the state resides in the internet.


### Understand the use of abstraction, layering, and modularization in the design of the internet.



### List the layers of the internet protocol stack, in the correct order.

Application -> transport -> network -> link -> physical

### Describe the functionality of each layer in the protocol stack.

**Application**

Network application and their respective application layers. Protocols include HTTP (web document request and transfer), SMTP (e-mail messages) and FTP (transfer of files between two end systems).

**Transport**

Transports application-layer messages between application endpoints. Two transport protocols - TCP and UDP.

TCP: Connection oriented service, guaranteed delivery of messages to the destination.

UDP: Connectionless service, no guaranteed reliability.

**Network**

Responsible for moving network-layer packets (called **datagrams**) from one host to another. The transport layer passes the packet and destination address to the network layer.

Contains IP protocol and many different routing protocols.

**Link**

Routes a datagram through a series of routers between the source and destination. The network layer passes the datagram to the link layer at every node.

The service provided by link-layer protocols depend on the respective protocol. Examples include Ethernet and WiFi.

**Physical**

Responsible to move individual bits from one node to the next. Physical protocols depend on the transmission medium (e.g. copper wire or fiber optics).

### Describe how a stream of data is turned, in broad terms, into packets.


### Understand encapsulation and the structure of packets flowing in the internet.

Link-layer switches implement the bottom 2 layers of the protocol stack, routers implement the bottom 3.

Each layer encapsulates the packet from the layer above it with some data or header that carries the information from that layer.

## C. Internet Design Principles

### Know the end-to-end principle and an example of how it is applied in the case of FTP.


### Arguments for and against smart versus dumb network.


### Know what the "fate-sharing" design principle is.

