---
title: M4 - DNS, Transport Protocols, Connection Multiplexing and NAT
---

# DNS, Transport Protocols, Connection Multiplexing and NAT

## DNS

The internet provides two transport protocols available to applications - UDP and TCP. When a new network application is made, a decision has to be made between UDP and TCP.

The **TCP** service model provides a connection-oriented service and a reliable data transfer service. It constructs a TCP connection between the server and client and ensures that exchanged packets arrive and are in the correct order.

**UDP** is a lightweight transfer protocol that provides minimal services. It provides *no guarantee* that the packets will arrive or in the correct order.

### How DNS Works

DNS is a service that translates host names into IP addresses. The application sends a query messsage over to the network and the DNS server replies with the required address.

There are three types of DNS servers:

1. **Root DNS servers** - the initial server that the client contacts. Replies with the IP addresses of TLD servers depending on the host name requested.
2. **Top-level domain (TLD) servers** - responsible for top-level domains such as `.com`, `.org`, `.edu` and all country-based top level domains.
3. **Authoritative DNS servers** - the final server that contains the mapping of host names to IP addresses.

When a client wants some IP address they need to first contact the root DNS servers, then the TLD server, then finally the authoritative servers.

:::tip Example
A host `cis.poly.edu` requires the IP address of `gaia.cs.umass.edu`.

Assume that:
- The local DNS server is called `dns.poly.edu`.
- The authoritative server for `gaia.cs.umass.edu` is `dns.umass.edu`.

The process is as follows:
1. `cis.poly.edu` sends a DNS query message to `dns.poly.edu`.
2. `dns.poly.edu` forwards the query to a root DNS server.
3. The root server responds by sending the IP address of a TLD server that handles `.edu`.
4. `dns.poly.edu` resends the query to the TLD server.
5. The TLD server responds with the IP address of `dns.umass.edu`.
6. `dns.poly.edu` resends the query directly to `dns.umass.edu`.
7. `dns.umass.edu` responds with the IP address of `gaia.cs.umass.edu`.
8. `dns.poly.edu` forwards this responds back to `cis.poly.edu`.
:::

### DNS Caching

DNS caching is the process of storing information from DNS responses to the local DNS server. This removes the need to go through the whole process every time a DNS query message is sent.

Local DNS servers generally store host name mappings for two days before discarding them.

## Transport Protocols

## Network Address Translation