---
title: 'M2 - Asymptotic Analysis'
---

# Asymptotic Analysis

## Code Runtime Problems

Give and briefly justify good `Θ` bounds on the worst case running times for the following blocks of pseudocode dealing with an array `A` of length `n`.

---

1. Finding the maximum in a list.
```
max = -infinity
for each element a in A:
    if max < a
        max = a
return max
```
This has a worst case running time of `Θ(n)`, as it iterates through every element of `A`.

---

2. "Median-of-three" computation
```
first = A[1]
last = A[n]
middle = A[floor(n/2)]
If first <= middle And middle <= last:
    return middle
Else If middle <= first And first <= last:
    return first
Else:
    return last
```
This has a worst case running time of `Θ(1)`, as no iteration occurs and accessing the `ith` element in an array (knowing the index) is `Θ(1)` time.

---

3. Counting inversions
```
inversions = 0
For each index i from 1 to n:
    For each index j from (i+1) to n:
        If a[i] > a[j]:
            Increment inversions
Return inversions
```
This has a worst case running time of `Θ(n^2)`, as there is a `for` loop nested in another `for` loop. So for every one iteration in the outer loop, `n-1` iterations occur in the inner one.

---

4. Repeated division:
```
count = 0
While n > 0:
    count = count + 1
    n = floor(n/2)
Return count
```
This has a worst case running time of `Θ(lgn)`. This is a `while` loop, so the number of iterations depend on the conditional. In this case, the iterations depend on the size of `n`. Since `n` is halved every iteration, the algorithm runs in `lgn` time.

## Progress of While Loops

The number of iterations in a `while` loop is not as obvious as a `for` loop. Thus it requires more analysis. Consider the following snippet of code:

```
i = findNeighbouringInversion(A)
while i >= 0
    swap A[i] and A[i+1]
    i = findNeighbouringInversion(A)
```

Where `findNeighbouringInversion(A)` is a function that returns an index `i` such that `A[i] > A[i+1]`, or `-1` if there are none.

### Measuring Progress

The `while` loop only stops when there are no inversions left in `A`. As a result we can say that the run time depends on the number of inversions.

An inversion requires two numbers, thus in an array of `n` elements there are `nC2` possible inversions; i.e. the number of inversions is in `O(n^2)`. This is the upper bound for the number of inversions.

Since the run time depends on the number of inversions, `O(n^2)` is also the upper bound for the run time of this algorithm.

