---
title: Principles of Javascript
---

# Principles of Javascript

## Global Execution Context

What happens when javascript runs the following code?

```javascript
const num = 3;
function multiplyBy2(inputNumber) {
    const result = inputNumber * 2;
    return result;
}
const name = "Will";
```

The variables `num` and `name` are stored in global memory. The function `multiplyBy2` is also stored globally, but its contents are skipped because the function is never called.

As the code is run we create a *global execution context*.

The thread that runs javascript is *single-threaded*, that is it only ever runs one thing at a time.

## Local Execution Context

When a function is called, a *local execution context* is created.

```javascript
function multiplyBy2(inputNumber) {
    const result = inputNumber * 2;
    return result;
}
const output = multiplyBy2(4);
```

In the local execution context there exists a *local thread* and *local memory*. The local thread runs all the code within the function block line by line. This execution blocks the global thread from running.

In global memory, `output` is saved as `undefined` until the `multiplyBy2` function finishes executing. Then, `output` is updated to the returned result. Steps:

1. `output` is saved as `undefined` in global memory.
2. In local memory, the parameter `inputNumber` is updated to `4`.
3. The constant `result` is saved into local memory as `4 * 2 = 8`.
4. All local memory is deleted except for `result`.
5. `result` is returned and saved into `output`.

## Call Stack

The call stack is a way for the javascript runtime to know "where" it is in the program. The global execution context is the always on the bottom of this stack. Any additional execution contexts are added to the top of the stack whenever it is created.