---
title: Functional Programming and Closure
---

# Functional Programming and Closure

## Pure Functions

Pure functions are functions that have no **side effects**. This means that the function does not change any other part of the program other than what it is meant to do.

:::tip Note
If a global variable is passed onto a function as a parameter, it is passed by *reference*. This means that if the parameter is changed, then the global variable is changed as well.
:::

## High Order Functions

A high order function is a function that abstracts not only the type of data that it might receive, but also a part of the functionality. In other words, a function that either takes in or returns a function.

This is possible in javascript because functions are treated as **objects**. They operate and can be treated like any other object.

The built-in `map` function is an example of a higher-order function:

```javascript
function map(array, callback) {
    let result = [];
    for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        result.push(callback(array[i]));
    }
    return result;
}
```

## Closure

When a function finishes executing, its local memory is deleted. However it is possible for functions to hold on to live data between executions.

The key principle here is that *where* the functions are defined determines *what variables* the function has access to during execution. For example:

```javascript
function outer() {
    let counter = 0;
    return function() {
        counter++;
        console.log(counter);
    }
}
const func = outer();
```

Notice how the returned function does things with the `counter` variable but the `counter` variable itself was never returned. This means that the `counter` variable will be the **same** for all executions of `func`. As a result multiple executions of `func` would show the following:

```javascript
func() // 1
func() // 2
func() // 3
```

The reason this works is because when a function is returned, its *lexical scope* is returned along with it. When the function is run and there is a variable, the javascript engine first looks in the local memory for the variable, then its lexical scope, then the global memory.

If we produce another function by calling `outer` again, say `func2`, then `func2` will have a different lexical scope than `func`. That is it will "restart" the counter variable rather than continuing it from the original calls to `func`.

```javascript
const func = outer();
func() // prints 1
func() // prints 2

const func2 = outer();
func2() // prints 1
```