---
title: Asynchronous Javascript
---

# Asynchronous Javascript

The fact that javascript's thread is single-threaded suggests that asynchrony is not possible. However asynchronous code is crucial for web development as often we would need to wait for data before calling our functions.

## Browser API

Consider the following code.

```javascript
function printHello() { console.log('Hello'); }

setTimeout(printHello, 0);
console.log('Me first!');
```

What prints first, `me first!` or `hello`? The javascript engine first allocates memory for the definition of `printHello` in the global namespace. But then what exactly happens when `setTimeout` is called?

One of the aspects of the browser API is a background timer. The `setTimeout` function utilizes this timer, using it to determine when `printHello` should be called. In this particular case, `setTimeout` tells the browser to set up a timer for `0ms`, then once it's complete, call `printHello`. As a result, `Me first!` would print before `Hello`.

## Callback Queue

If we add some function that blocks the single javascript thread for a second like so:

```javascript
function printHello() { console.log('Hello'); }

function block1Sec() { /* blocks the thread for 1 sec */ }

setTimeout(printHello, 0);
block1Sec();
console.log('Me first!');
```

Now what gets printed first? The `setTimeout` function does the exact same thing as before, except this time the timer completes *during* the execution of `block1Sec()`.

Whenever a callback is *queued*, it gets added to the **callback queue**. The callback queue works such that it only runs whatever is in front of the queue whenever *all* functions complete, including global. In other words it only adds the function to the call stack whenever the call stack is empty.

Thus in this case `Hello` would always print last as the callback queue waits until all code, that is `block1Sec()` and `console.log`, to complete before it runs `printHello`.

## XMLHttpRequest

Often we would like to receive some form of data from a server somewhere. This is done through `XMLHttpRequest` from the browser API. If we want to receive some data, we pass the `GET` method in the request:

```javascript
const req = new XMLHttpRequest();
req.open("GET", "http://www.example.org/example.txt");
req.send();
```

If we add an *event listener* to the `XMLHttpRequest`, we can pass a callback function that would run when this request completes:

```javascript
function logResponse() {
    console.log(this.responseText);
}
req.addEventListener("load", logResponse);
```

Libraries like `jQuery` wraps up this logic in a simple `get` function like so:

```javascript
function logResponse(data) {
    console.log(data);
}
$.get("http://www.example.org/example.txt", logResponse);
```