---
title: Object Oriented Javascript
---

# Object-Oriented Javascript

Object oriented programming (OOP) is a programming paradigm used to structure code. It is essentially a way such that all functionality relevant to *some data* is *immediately available* when we are dealing with that exact data.

For example, say we have some users with scores and we wish to have the ability to increase the score for a particular user. We can store this data in an **object**:

```javascript
const user1 = {
    name: "Will",
    score: 3,
    increment: function() {
        user1.score++;
    }
};

user1.increment(); // user1.score = 4
```

## Declaring Objects

One method we can use to declare objects is by first creating an empty object then using **dot notation**:

```javascript
let user2 = {};

user2.name = "Tim";
user2.score = 6;
user2.increment = function() {
    user2.score++;
};
```

We can also use the built-in function `Object.create`:

```javascript
let user3 = Object.create(null);
user3.name = "Eva";
// rest of the code like before
```

This is however quite inconvenient if we wish to do this for many more users. We can automate this by creating a function that produces an object:

```javascript
function userCreator(name, score) {
    let newUser = {};
    newUser.name = name;
    newUser.score = score;
    newUser.increment = function() {
        newUser.score++;
    };
    return newUser;
}

let user1 = userCreator("Will", 3);
let user2 = userCreator("Tim", 5);
```

The main issue with this is that every user uses up memory for all declarations inside the user. The declaration for this `increment` function is repeated for every user that is created.

## Object Prototype

One way to solve our previous problem is to store the `increment` function in one object and let the javascript engine look for the `increment` function in that object if it cannot find it in `user1`.

One method of doing this is to use `Object.create`:

```javascript
let userFunctionStore = {
    increment: function() { this.score++; },
    login: function() { console.log("You're logged in!"); }
}

function userCreator(name, score) {
    let newUser = Object.create(userFunctionStore);
    newUser.name = name;
    newUser.age = age;
    return newUser;
}
```

We first initialize an object that acts as the *basis* for our users. This object contains the functionality of the users, such as `increment` and `login`. Then we create another function `userCreator` that uses `Object.create` to produce its users. Every time we update the `userFunctionStore` object we update the functionality for **every** user.

This happens because when we use `Object.create` we set the **prototype** of `newUser` to be `userFunctionStore`. Specifically, `newUser` would have a field `__proto__` that points to the `userFunctionStore` object.

:::tip Note
The `__proto__` property of the object acts as both a *getter* and a *setter* for the object's prototype. That is, we can easily update the prototype of an object by setting its `__proto__` to equal something else.
:::

## The new Operator

If we call a constructor function with the `new` keyword, javascript automates the creation and return of the new object. That is, if we plan to use `new` with `userCreator`, we can change the code to:

```javascript
function userCreator(name, score) {
    this.name = name;
    this.score = score;
}
let user1 = new userCreator("Will", 3);
```

The `new` operator also automatically assigns a `prototype` field to the constructor function `userCreator`. This `prototype` field is where the functionality is stored:

```javascript
userCreator.prototype // {}
userCreator.prototype.increment = function() {
    this.score++;
}

user1.increment() // 4
```

Note that `.prototype` and `.__proto__` are two different things. The `.prototype` is a property specific to constructor functions. The `.__proto__` property is specific to the objects that are created.

The following code does the same thing as the `userFunctionStore` code before:

```javascript
function User(name, score) {
    this.name = name;
    this.score = score;
}

User.prototype.increment = function() {
    this.score++;
};
User.prototype.login = function() {
    console.log("You logged in!");
};

let user1 = new User("Eva", 9);
user1.increment();
```

## Classes

ES6 introduces the idea of classes into javascript, which is essentially a different syntax for the exact prototype inheritance that we were doing before. The above can be rewritten to the following:

```javascript
class User {
    constructor(name, score) {
        this.name = name;
        this.score = score;
    }
    increment() {
        this.score++;
    }
    login() {
        console.log("You're logged in!");
    }
}
let user1 = new User("Eva", 9);
user1.increment();
```

Note that this is simply a change of syntax and *inherently* there is no difference to the code that we wrote before.