---
title: Sock Merchant
---

# Sock Merchant

## Problem Description

John works at a clothing store. He has a large pile of socks that he must pair by color for sale. Given an array of integers representing the color of each sock, determine how many pairs of socks with matching colors there are.

For example, there are 7 socks with colors `[1,2,1,2,1,3,2]`. There is 1 pair of color 1 and 1 pair of color 2, giving us 2 pairs in total.

## Thoughts and Solution

My original thought process was to first count the number of occurences of each number in the given array then divide that number by 2 to get the pairs. If the number of occurences is odd, the number of pairs is one less of that number divided by 2.

I began by making a helper function `countOccurences`:

```javascript
function countOccurences(ar, num) {
    return ar.filter(n => n == num).length;
}
```

Then we only need to iterate through the original array:

```javascript
function getPairs(ar) {
    let totalPairs = 0;
    ar.forEach(el => {
        totalPairs += Math.floor(countOccurences(ar, el) / 2);
    });
    return totalPairs;
}
```

I quickly realized that this solution would always double count. For example, say we have the input `[10,10,20]`. My original function will count 2 pairs for 10 because it calls `countOccurences` for each 10.

We need a way to remember the numbers that we have seen. I did this by adding a **set**, and only adding to `totalPairs` if we have not seen the number before.

```javascript
function getPairs(ar) {
    let totalPairs = 0;
    let seen = new Set();
    ar.forEach(el => {
        if (!seen.has(el)) {
            totalPairs += Math.floor(countOccurences(ar, el) / 2);
            seen.add(el);
        }
    });
    return totalPairs;
}
```

## Community Solution

User `lukes712` proposed the following solution:

```javascript
function getPairs(ar) {
    const colors = new Set();
    let pairs = 0;
    ar.forEach(el => {
        if (!colors.has(el)) {
            colors.add(el);
        } else {
            pairs++;
            colors.remove(el);
        }
    });
    return pairs;
}
```

This is a *much* better solution than the one I did because it is an order of magnitude faster. Mine requires iterating through the list for every element I encounter, resulting in a time of `O(n^2)`. The solution here only iterates through the list once, meaning it runs in `O(n)` time.

This solution works because 

---

*All problems courtesy of [HackerRank.com](https://www.hackerrank.com).*